# apple-product-placement
Jonah Werbel, DS4003 (UVA 24sp)

For my project, I will be exploring a dataset which compiled a list of product placement by Apple in TV shows and movies. The dataset is publicly available on Kaggle at this link: [https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/mohammadhmozafary/apples-product-placements-in-movies-and-tv-shows](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/mohammadhmozafary/apples-product-placements-in-movies-and-tv-shows).

The live app can be found at [https://apple-product-placement.onrender.com](https://apple-product-placement.onrender.com) (note, however, if it was not used recently, it may spin down with inactivity and take a couple minutes to load).

## Building Process
This project was divided into a series of 5 sprints. After deciding upon an initial idea for the dashboard and creating user profiles for a set of anticipated users (sprint 1), I found and cleaned my data (sprint 2) before designing a rough layout of what I expected the dashboard to look like (sprint 3). Then, I created a rough (extremely rough) draft of a fully functioning dashboard, albeit with limited design and UI features (sprint 4). In the final sprint, I concluded the development of the dashboard, implementing more UI/UX features to make it more user friendly, as well as including additional styling and functionality to make it more cohesive.

It was an extremely iterative process, as I worked on one aspect at a time. When building the actual dashboard, I found it extremely helpful to use a Jupyter Notebook (included in this repository for reference) to begin drafting what I expected each graph to look like. This allowed me to first create each element and get it working before then porting them into a larger app file. In fact, once I had the graphs showing the desired visualization, it was relatively simple to build the rough layout of the dashboard, add interactive components, include the graphs, and then get it all working (first static, and then make it actually dynamic by implementing callbacks).

Once I completed my rough draft (v0), I had a chance to look back at my dashboard and see what I could improve. The biggest things were clarity of instructions, and UI (although the initial version had my desired layout, it was not pretty by any means). I spent a significant amount of time working with Bootstrap (and specifically the LUX theme from [https://bootswatch.com/lux/](https://bootswatch.com/lux/)) to make my graphs consistently styled with the other elements. Like in most projects, this final sprint is where I spent the most amount of time tweaking smaller design choices to get everything right, finalizing a project I could be proud of!

## Data Science Concepts Learned, Used
Clean data was extremely important in this project. The data wasn't originally "dirty," but it wasn't entirely clean, either, so I first needed to transform it into a more complete file which would be easier to utilize in my visualizations. However, different visualizations still required slightly different formats and collections, so I needed to do some slight refactoring, collection, aggregation, and filtering of the data before each visualization could actually be produced and appear on the dashboard.

I tried to also use generally good coding principles. My final [app.py](app.py) file is split up into clear sections and organized in a linear fashion to build the app. Each component is created and then added to a `div` which appears somewhere in the final application, and those `div`s are often nested into other ones. I didn't include a ton of comments, but my variable names (and those comments which are present) provide a clear picture of what is happening throughout the code, making it simple for another person to understand and replicate my work.

Finally, I learned a lot about data visualization during this project, and tried my best to include it. Whether this included the consistency of colors and the order of legends (note that the device lists for the pie chart and line chart present their devices in the same alphabetical order and have the same color corresponding to each device, overriding the default organization of the pie chart which sorts everything by which "piece of the pie" is largest), size of markers on plots, usage of a logarithmic scale for the scatterplot to better display the range of data, or even just the size of each graph in relationship to the others, these were all skills and intuitions I developed throughout this class and project. In addition, the consistent formatting, the grouping and order of "selector" widgets (including initially hiding the more advanced ones, as well as ordering the others in a more logical way), and general spacing and organization (I included the instructions in the top right where a user is most likely to look, then direct their eye down to the selector widgets before they take full advantage of the complete graphs filling the main area of the page) were all techniques I developed during this course as well.

## Notable Learning Experiences
One of the largest learning experiences I had during this project is to not _overclean_ my data. I was extremely thorough in cleaning the data, but initially rushed myself and did not take the time to do a proper analysis of what the dataset actually consisted of. Had I done that, I would have realized each row in the set was for one device in a movie/TV episode, not for the entire movie/episode itself. Therefore, I first aggregated the dataset, collecting a sum of image counts into one row and each device which was seen before "melting" the data and connecting the device type to the title. I realized my mistake when I began creating my graphs, and to fix it only needed to delete some of the initial cleaning I had done. This demonstrates an important lesson: thoroughly explore and entirely understand your data before beginning to manipulate it!

In addition, I really did learn a lot about visual design throughout this process. Anecdotally (by looking at my dashboard and realizing ways it was lacking) and by getting feedback and thoughts of others, my dashboard continued to look better and better, and each step I took towards developing the final product continued to give me a better intuitive understanding of how I can engage with visual design in the future as well.

I think I also benefited from having a clear plan and understandung of the task and what I needed to do. My draft layout (sprint 3) ended up being remarkably similar to the final layout, so taking the time early in the process to determine what I wanted the final product to look like proved extremely beneficial and helpful in guiding me through this process.

My background as a student studying computer science at the university already proved to be another asset in the development of this dashboard because I was already familiar with Python and HTML (plus a bit of Bootstrap for design), so could focus more on making the application and not learning how to create a program in the first place. This project also, however, gave me more experience and practice looking at reference documentation to quickly understand the limitations and capabilities of the packages being utilized.

## Appendix: File Description/Guide
Below, find a guide to all files in this repository which correspond to major work done during the sprints to develop this project. 
| Sprint #	| File  | Description   |
|----------	|-----  |------------	|
| 1         | [1-user-personas/UserPersonas.pdf](1-user-personas/UserPersonas.pdf)  | Describes anticipated users of my dashboard |
| 2        	| [data/placements.csv](data/placements.csv)  | Original data  |
| 2        	| [data/data.csv](data/data.csv)  | Cleaned data	|
| 2        	| [data/data-cleaning.ipynb](data/data-cleaning.ipynb)    | Jupypter Notebook for all work in sprint: cleaning the data, performing EDA, and brainstorming visualizations |
| 3         | [3-layout/layout.pptx](3-layout/layout.pptx) | PowerPoint file where I designed the layout for my app |
| 3         | [3-layout/layout.pdf](3-layout/layout.pdf)   | Final file with the app layout, plus some notes regarding it |
| 4         | [4-dashboard-v0/app.py](4-dashboard-v0/app.py)  | Work on v0 of the app - will continue to be updated |
| 4         | [requirements.txt](requirements.txt) | List of python packages required for render to be able to load the app |
| 4         | [4-dashboard-v0/plotly.ipynb](4-dashboard-v0/plotly.ipynb) | Jupyter Notebook where I did some scratch work, designed some graphs, etc to more easily port into my actual [4-dashboard-v0/app.py](4-dashboard-v0/app.py) file |
| 5         | [app.py](app.py)  | Final version of the dashboard |